He who rules is termed Īt. Īśā means 'by the Lord'. The Lord is the Ruler and the real Self of every creature. The difference between the controller and the controlled is not to be understood as real—it is merely apparent and based on illusion.
By such a Lord, identical with oneself, is to be overspread i.e., covered. What? idam sarvam = all this, yat kincha = whatsoever, jagatyām = on earth, jagat = all that moves. By one's own Self—the Lord, the supreme Self—which is the sole reality, all these unreal things, both movable and immovable, have to be covered over, perceiving thus—'I am the inner Self of all.'
The sense is that one should realise that all is Self and that there is no variety in the Universe. This is the chief teaching of the present Upanishad and corresponds, in its significance, to the well-known 'tattvamasi' of the Chāndogyopaniṣad.
Just as adventitious bad odour in a piece of sandal, arising from moisture, is overcome by true fragrance when the sandal piece is rubbed, so indeed, will all the congenital variety of the world, such as being an agent or an enjoyer, superimposed on the Self, disappear at the perception everywhere of the one really existent Self.
What a person, that is so full of the conception that the Lord is the Self of all, ought to do is to renounce the three-fold desire for offspring etc., and not be engaged in karma. In 'tena tyaktena', tyakta means renunciation—a son or a servant who has been abandoned or is dead, cannot save one since all connection is severed between them. Therefore the word can only mean 'renunciation'.
bhuñjīthāḥ = do save. Having thus renounced desires, be not greedy (mā gṛdhaḥ) i.e., do not long for wealth. kasya svit = of anybody. The meaning is—Do not long for the wealth of anybody—yourself or another. Or we may say—Be not greedy. Why? kasya svit dhanam = Whose is wealth?—implying a denial. If wealth could belong to anybody it might be sought; but everything having disappeared through the discovery of the Lord everywhere, all this is of the Self, and all this is the Self. Thus it means—'Do not seek an unreality.'